# Page 1

Shelters for the Spirit The first impression of Tadao Ando's architecture is its materiality. His powerful concrete walls set a limit. Beyond this point there is no passage but that which is opened by his will. A second impression of Tadao Ando's architecture is its tactility. Hard walls seem soft to the touch. They exclude then enclose, admitting light, wind and the passing visitor, who leaves behind the disorder of everyday existence to be sheltered in a realm of stillness. A third impression of Tadao Ando's architecture is its emptiness. Within, only light and space surround the visitor. Enso, the mysterious circles drawn by Zen Buddhist monks in a single stroke, sym- bolize emptiness, oneness, and the moment of enlightenment. The circle and other rigorous geometric forms are the vocabulary of Ando, related as much to Western architecture as to any Eastern thought. He cites the Pantheon in Rome as an influence on his work, proof that simple shapes, fashioned with a mastery of light and materials, can create a transcendent space. He speaks also of the Prisons of Piranese, whose "dynamic verticality" contrasts with the horizontal emphasis of traditional Japanese architecture, which is "non-geometric and irregular" by nature. Tadao Ando has said that a goal of his work is to bring together these apparently divergent ideas of space in a "unified transcendent architecture". Winner of the 1992 Carlsberg Prize, the 1995 Pritzker Prize, the 1996 Praemium Imperiale and the 1997 Royal Institute of British Architects Gold Medal, Tadao Ando is today one of the most highly respected architects in the world, influencing an entire generation of students. Curiously though, Ando is known mostly through professional publications. Few of his admirers, or for that matter his detractors, have taken the time and effort required to visit his buildings. Even the best photography or the most complete draw- ing cannot reproduce the effects of changing light as the sun goes down behind Hompuku-ji Temple on the island of Awaji, overlooking the Bay of Osaka. Private houses, private worlds Born in Osaka in 1941, Tadao Ando is unusual in that he was self-educated as an architect, largely through travels in the United States, Europe and Africa (1962-6g). He founded Tadao Ando Architect & Associates in Osaka in 196g. When asked how he came to be interested in architecture, he replies, "As it happens work was carried on where I lived when I was 15, and I got to know some of the carpenters. About the same time, in a used book store I saw a book on the complete work of Le Corbusier. I recopied some of his drawings, and i would say that that is how I began to be interested in architecture.", Although the influence of Le Corbusier and others such as Louis Kahn on Ando is often cited, it is interest- ing to note that the first project which brought him public attention, the so-called Azuma House (Row House, Sumiyoshi, Osaka, 1975-76) is already very much a personal creation. On a small site (57.3 m2) inserted into a row of narrow houses, the simple concrete Façade and equally unadorned doorway stand out without breaking the rhythm of the street. Old wood houses which formerly lined the street have given way to a hodgepodge of generally undistinguished modern residences. Although this residential area of Osaka is somewhat less chaotic in appearance than many other parts of a Naoshima Contemporary Art Museum, Annex T. Interview with Tadao Ando, Osaka, December 15, 1990: 6 Shelters for the Spirit metropolis with a population density of 11,793 persons per square kilometer (1995), there is a marked contrast between this concrete slab and its environment. Stepping through the door, the visitor needs no longer be conscious of the external world. The house is divided into three equal sections - a living room and kitchen below, and two bedrooms above, separated by an external courtyard, and the stairway up to the second floor. Access to the bathroom on the ground floor from the bedrooms requires the resident to go into the courtyard. This fact surprises Western visitors but seems to be of little concern to the Japanese, who as Ando says "are used to living with the rhythms of nature." As for its limited dimensions, with total floor space of 64.7m?, the Sumiyoshi Row House exceeds the average size of an Osaka dwelling (estimated at 61.0 m? in 1993). Despite a rigorously geometric design, this house, with its unusual façade and open central courtyard, is closely related both to local architecture and to Japanese traditions. By excluding the chaotic environment and admitting nature, Ando also developed what would become one of the central themes of his work in this house, which won a prize from the Japanese Architectural Association. Built in a wooded residential area above the port city of Kobe, where it was for- merly alone, the Koshino House was completed in two phases (1980-81 and 1983-84). The fan-shaped exten- sion, now the master bedroom, is partially below ground. On this steeply sloped site, the visitor enters from above, looking down on the roof of the house before entering. The original scheme consisted of two parallel box-like volumes connected by an underground corridor. The longer block, furthest from the entrance contains a series of six identical rooms, which bring to mind the monastic cells of Le Corbusier's Monastery of Sainte- Marie-de-la-Tourette (Eveux-sur-l'Arbresle, France, 1952-59). The corridor leading to them is lit by a series of slit windows, which have been compared to those employed by Luis Barragán in the Francisco Gilardi House (Mexico City, 1976), but Ando's openings here progressively increase in height whereas Barragán's were ident- ical in shape. The most expressive interior space is the double-height living room, located in the first block, near the entrance. Windows are situated to offer only a limited view to the garden, but admit generous amounts of light, which flood over the large concrete surfaces, bringing them to life with passing clouds or the advancing hour. As Ando says, "Such things as light and wind only have meaning when they are introduced inside a house in a form cut off from the outside world. The isolated fragments of light and air suggest the entire natural world. The forms I have created have altered and acquired meaning through elementary nature (light and air) that give indications of the passage of time and the changing of the seasons..." z Ando's own comments on the influence of other architects on his work seem particularly pertinent to a case like that of the Koshino House. I am interested in a dialogue with the architec- ture of the past," he says, "but it must be filtered through my own vision and my own experience. I am indebted to Le Corbusier or to Mies van der Rohe, but in the same way, I take what they did and interpret it in my own fashion." 3 In a more recent interview, Tadao Ando cited Le Corbusier's "Dom-ino" houses as being essential to his continuing influence. These housing kits were conceived in 1914-15 with the idea of mass producing a set of basic components, including the molds for making a simple concrete skeleton with cantilevered slabs. "Designed without supporting walls, they completely liberated the expression of modern architecture," he

says. 4

When considering the impact of Western masters on contemporary Japanese architecture, it may be worth noting that influences have flowed both ways since the period following World War I. It was on November 4, 1935, that the German architect Bruno Taut (1880-1938) wrote in his journal,

Chikatsu-Asuka

Historical Museum

2 Tadao Ando in: The Pritzker Architecture Prize, 1995. The Hyatt Foundation, Jenson & Walker, Los Angeles 1995.

з Ibd.

4 Interview with Tadao Ando, Osaka, October 22, 1996.


---

# Page 2

"I can truly claim to be the discoverer of Katsura." Having arrived in Japan in May 1933, Taut spent three and a half years writing about the 17th century imperial residence located near Kyoto, linking its elegant simplicity to the goals of the Modern Movement and calling it an "eternal monument." As Arata Isozaki points out, other Western architects, such as the German Gustav Prattz, had visited Katsura even before Taut, and had integrated its lessons into "the renewal of world architecture." s One of the first projects to bring international attention to Tadao Ando was his Rokko Housing (Rokko Housing 1, Kobe, Hyogo, 1981-83). Situated much further down the slope of the Rokko Mountains than the Koshino House, this complex is wedged into a restricted site on a south-facing 60° slope. Each of the 20 units is 5.4x4.8 m in size, and each has a terrace looking out toward the busy harbor of Kobe. Speaking recently about his different housing projects near this site, Tadao Ando, again demonstrating his interest in early modern architecture, said, "Adolf Loos succeeded through the Raumplan (volumetric plan) in creating variegated spaces within simple compositions from which ornament had been banished. I would like to create public spaces - in this case stairs and passageways - that make one almost giddy by their richness and variety. I think that in this way it's possible to produce spaces that belie their simplicity and avoid insipid. ness. I think architecture becomes interesting when it has a double character, that is, when it is as simple as possible but at the same time as complex as possible." 6 Some years later, Ando built a second housing complex adjacent to Rokko | (Rokko Housing II, 1989-93). Four times larger than the original building, this structure includes 50 dwellings, designed on a 5.2 m square grid. A central staircase runs through three connected but distinct clusters of apart- ments, each of which is unique in size and layout. A glass-enclosed swimming pool provides a spectacular view toward the lower areas of the city and the port. More luxurious than their earlier counterpart, the Rokko I apart- ments show the mature talent of Tadao Ando, deriving a complex whole from the basic geometry of the square. Placed above and to the right of Rokko I, the Paramount (Rokko Il) building is set into the same 6o° slope and rotated towards the east. It is clearly a variation on, or rather an amplification of the earlier building, related to it like a musical variation. In both of the Rokko buildings, Tadao Ando creates a visually arresting form derived from considerations such as the particular topography of the site, but also from his analysis of how best to design very private individual dwellings which are also part of a communal whole. A third, and even larger structure is now under way above Rokko Il (Rokko Hous- ing Ill, under construction). Measuring 20,730 m? in total floor area, this new complex will be built on three lev- els with rooftop gardens for each of 174 apartments. Designed with a system of L-shaped blocks, Rokko Ill will include a swimming pool and facilities for the elderly. The three Rokko buildings will offer an unusual panorama of the career of an architect whose rigor has lead him to employ a strict geometric vocabulary while nonetheless evolving constantly in his capacity to compose and derive new spatial experiences from a given set of elements. When examining the list of projects chosen for this book, Tadao Ando placed his own atelier in Osaka in the same section as the residences (Atelier II, Oyodo, Osaka, 1990-91). Aside from the obvious similarity in terms of scale, this choice can also be defended from the philosophical point of view: The architect's atelier is his spiritual home. Opaque frosted glass doors at street level without any apparent sign greet the visitor. Once inside, quite close to the desks where assistants are at work, one is immediately aware of the full-height atrium, which cuts through this seven-story building (two floors below ground), its width increas- ing at each level. Ando receives visitors on the upper level. A narrow passage runs along the void, giving a moment's pause to those who fear heights. Something of the dynamic verticality that Ando found in Piranese's Prison series is at work here, but so too is his capacity to create a world behind a concrete wall. Like the Sumiyashi Row House on a smaller scale, the architect's atelier shuts out the sights and noises of urban Osaka, while a skylight admits the effects of passing clouds. Homes for the Spirit: When asked if he is religious, Tadao Ando replies, "I feel that the goal of most reli gions is Similar, to make men happier and more at ease with themselves, I see no contradiction in my design- ing Christian churches." + Indeed, Ando has built a number of Christian chapels and other places of religion and contemplation. In his architecture in general, there is a processional quality, which is related to the design of Japanese temples. "I do not make direct visual reference to temples in my work," says Ando, "but it is true that I have visited a very large number of such buildings, and unconsciously the idea of an indirect access recurs frequently in my work, Traditional Japanese architecture is almost never symmetrical, and this too enters into my subconscious undoubtedly."& It is in his placés of contemplation that these facts appear most clearly: highlighting the qualities that place Tadao Ando in a category apart, making him one of the great architects of

our time.

One of Tadao Ando's most remarkable buildings is also one of his simplest. The Church of the Light (Ibaraki, Osaka, 1988-8g) is located in a residential suburb 40 km to the north east of the center of Osaka. It consists of a rectangular concrete box crossed at a 1s" angle by a freestanding wall. The bisecting wall obliges the visitor to turn to enter the chapel. As ever with Ando, entering a building requires an act of will and an awareness of the architecture. Within, the rough textured floors and pews are made from dark-stained scaffolding planks emphasizing the starkness of the design. In an unusual configuration, the floor descends in stages toward the altar, which is next to the rear wall, whose horizontal and vertical openings form a cross, flooding the space with light. Built for the Ibaraki Kasugaoka Church, a member of the United Church of Christ in Japan, at the behest of the Reverend Noboru Karukore, the church has a total floor area of only 13 m*, but an undeniable strength. For the Reverend Karukore, this place brings to mind the words of Christ, "For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am in the midst of them" (Mt. 18,20). The church discovered in the course of construction that it could not afford a roof. Ando told the building com- pany that he would consider the church to be finished as it was, open to the sky, leading the company to donate the needed covering. So too, he proposed that there be no glass in the cruciform opening, allowing wind to blow through the chapel just as light entered. Rejected because of winter cold, this idea too is symbolic of Ando's consistent emphasis on closing out the urban environment, while admitting manifestations of nature. It should be noted that the opening in the wall of the Church of the Light assumes a shape which is not quite that of the traditional Christian cross. The horizontal bar is lower than it might be, just above center. This subtle difference is important. To each his own giver oflight, The goal of religions is similar, as the architect says; and his is a spirituality, expressed in built form, which goes beyond specific identification. Awaji is the largest island of the Inland Sea, set 600 km to the south-west of Tokyo opposite Kobe in the Bay of Osaka. In Japanese mythology, the archipelago was born of the union of two divin- ities, Izanagi and Izanani. Their first born, Onogoro shima, is identified with Awaji. Here, on a hill above a small port. Tadao Ando built his Water Temple (1990-91). Called Hompuku-ji, this is the main temple of Ninnaji Shin. gon, the oldest Tantric Buddhist sect in Japan, founded in 815. Following a small footpath, the visitor first sees al

Water Temple

7 Interview with Tadao Ande, Orala, Deceiters, ago: Interview with Tadso Ando. Osaka October 2t, N9g6 5 Arata Isozaki: "Katsura: a model for post-modern architecture," in: Katsura Villa - Space and Form. Iwanami Shoten Publishers,

Tokyo 1983.

6 Futagawa, Yukio: Tadao Ando. GA Document Extra o1, ADA Edita,

Tokyo 1995.

8 Shelters for the Spirit


---

# Page 3

long concrete wall, 3 m high, with a single opening. Through this door one does not find an entrance, but rather another wall, blank. but curved this time, bordered by a white gravel path. Having walked past this new screen of concrete, the visitor discovers an oval lotus pond, 40 m long and zo m wide. In the center of the pond, a stairway descends to the real entrance of the temple. Below the lotus pond, within a circle 18m in diameter, the architect has Fabrica (Benetton Research Center) inscribed a 17.4 m square. Here, within a grid of red wood, a statue of Buddha turns its back to the west, where the only opening admits the glow of the setting sun. In this place at sunset the words of Tadao Ando can be more clearly understood: "Architecture," he says, "has forgotten that space can be a source of inspiration." Günter Nitschke has pointed out that the mandalas used for meditation employ the motif of a circle superposed on a square, and that one of them, the taizo-kai, represents "the world of womb-like phenomenal experience.", So too is the lotus the symbol of enlightenment in Buddhism. A dark. enclosed environment, suffused with red light, designed as a square set within a circle, the whole below a lotus pond is clearly a synthesis of these traditional elements. It is subtly anthropomorphic (the womb), symbolic (the mandala and the lotus) and yet thoroughly modern. Nor would it seem to be accidental that Awaji is regarded as the first born of Japan's islands: In this small space, with the setting sun glowing behind Buddha, the visitor, whether Buddhist or Christian, stands at the point of origin of all things. While Christianity and Buddhism may inform the architecture of the Church of the Light and the Water Temple, no denomination is attached to the Meditation Space built by Ando on the grounds of UNESCO in Paris (1995). This small structure, with a floor area of only 33 m?, is located on a 350m? site squeezed between Marcel Brewer's UNESCO Headquarters (1953-58) and the adjacent Conference Hall designed by Pier Luigi Nervi, Significantly, it is also next to the japanese garden created by Isamu Noguchi (1956-58) with 88 t of stone brought from Shikoku. Finally, on a wall near the entrance ramp of the Meditation Space hangs the Angel of Nagasaki, a small sculpture which was part of the Urakami Church in that city, when the Bomb exploded on August 9, 1945. Ando uses granite irradiated by the Hiroshima atomic bomb here for the basin and for the interior paving. Inside the 6.5 m high concrete cylinder, which has two openings, but no doors, light enters through a narrow strip skylight running around the perimeter and falls on the concrete wall. Once again, Tadao Ando has created a space that gives a strong sense of spirituality, this time in a very difficult site. The gently running water below the approach ramps gives a feeling of calm, which is confirmed by the powerful simplicity of the structure itself. Within, two armchairs by Ando are the only decor. It would hardly have seemed possible to design a significant structure smaller than the Sumiyoshi Row House, and yet Ando has done just that in Paris. Indeed the stark façade of the residence in Osaka recalls the stripped-down power of this. Meditation Space. Like the monks who attempted to draw a perfect circle in a single gesture, Ando here returns to the question of just how little is required to attain his basic goals. Doorways open to the breeze in all seasons, a space defined and enclosed by strong walls, light falling from above past a floating disk of concrete. Emptiness, and oneness in a humanist vision of spirituality. More, the specter of Hiroshima hangs over this place, present as it is in the minds of so many Japanese people. Present, as it should be in the minds of others. g Nitschke, Gunter: From Shusto to Ando, Academy Editions. Emst & Solin. London igga. 10 Shelters for the Spirit Museums: art, literature and more The Children's Museum (1g88-89) is located on a large wooded hillside site (87,222 mł) overlooking a lake near the city of Himeji: In this mature work of Tadao Ando, the visitor is invited to discover the architecture in relation to its natural setting. The main unit of the museum contains a library, indoor and outdoor theaters, an exhibition gallery, a multipurpose hall and a restaurant. The outdoor theater is located on the rooftop, with a spectacular view of the lake, A stepped waterfall and pool near the building also serve to make a connection between the museum and the scenery of the lake. A path, marked by a long con- crete wall leads the visitor away from the main structure toward a workshop complex consisting of a two-story square building. Along this path Ando has placed a surprising group of 16 concrete columns in a square grid. In their wooded setting, these gim high pillars recall that the first columns in architectural history were inspired by trees. Somewhere between architecture and sculpture, since it is dictated by no specific function, this interven- tion marks his intention to go beyond the traditional concept of his art to reaffirm a link between nature and the

built form..

Although called a Children's Museum, the facility in Himeji carries relatively few if any built references to childhood. Rather, Ando creates a group of buildings in a relatively complex arrange- ment, which could certainly serve other purposes. When asked if his style has not shifted toward a more com- plicated use of interpenetrating spaces, the architect replies, "Most of my early buildings were destined for housing. I used simple forms because the function of the architecture was simple. Now, the programs required of my buildings, for example museums, are more complex. What you perceive as an evolution in my style has more to do with programmatic requirements in my opinion." to Despite an inherent modesty, there seems little doubt that Tadao Ande is creating his works with an eye to posterity. The potential flexibility of the Himeji Children's Museum, and its lack of anecdotal references to childhood, most probably improve chances that it will survive longer. Tadao Ando has been particularly prolific in and around the city of Himeji. Just down the road from the Children's Museum he designed the Children's Seminar House (1gg1-g2), a residence for schoolchildren on vacation, which is capped by a small observatory. In the city itself is located the Museum of Literature (198g - 91), which is situated about 500 m from the famous Himeji Castle (known as shirasagi, the White Heron), which was first built by the Akamatsu family in the i4th century, before being conquered and enlarged by the Hideyoshi and Ikeda clans. Two 22.5 ml volumes intersect each other at a 3o° angle, and a cylinder 40 m in diameter encloses one of these, forming the spiral exhibition area. Here again, a wide stepped cascade runs in front of the building, and access ramps consciously emphasize the view toward the Castle. Although it is essentially dedicated to the work of the philosopher Tetsuro Watsuji (188g-1960), the Museum of Literature also has collections of the work of eight other writers and philosophers from this city. Although its site is not as generous as that of the Children's Museum, the Museum of Literature now forms a complex of three buildings. Aside from Ando's first structure, there is also what remains of the villa of the locally powerful Hamamoto family, whose residence occupied the site. Known as the bokoter, this traditional 8o year old structure now contains the study of Watsuji. Ando created a pond between his building and this older house to relate the two. Slightly further down the hill the architect recently made an addition to the Museum (1994-96). With its axis parallel to the grid of the first building, this annex is made of a rectangular glass box bisected at a 30 angle by a concrete wall. Although Ando compares this device 10 Interview with Tadao Ando, Osaka, October 20, 1996.


---

# Page 4

to that used in the Church of Light, there is a greater complexity in this design which is immediately apparent to the visitor. A 13 m square cube is also part of the structure, set at a 45° angle to the glass box. In the heart of the annex, Ando has placed a library formed by a set of concentric wooden squares, with a central opening to the sky. With its magnificent internal corridors of solid concrete, this building, which does seem quite simple from the outside, conserves within what is apparently a frequent feature of Ando's architecture: a processional design which willfully leads the visitor closer and closer to a place of concentrated meaning, in this case the heart of the library with its opening to the sky. The french designer Philippe Starck says that he admires Tadao Ando because he is a mystic in a country that is no longer mystic. This statement by a provocative foreigner may underestimate the interest of the contemporary Japanese in the arcane or the spiritual, but it does point to one quality of Ando's work. It should be noted that Ando himself does not explain his work in terms of mysticism, but rather in terms of an uncompromising will. As he says, "In architecture, there is a part that is the result of logical reasoning and a part that is created through the senses. There is always a point where they clash. I don't think architecture can be created without that collision. Yet practically every work of architecture nowadays is created from just one or the other. You don't sense a will behind the architecture, If architecture were just a matter of logic, the knowledge and the ability to solve the program should suffice, but the result is likely to be insipid and without feeling. On the other hand, it's not possible with just a sensibility to meet the various demands made by reality, for example, in areas such as function, safety and sanitation. There are plenty of contradictions at first, and overcoming conflicts is difficult. You need a strong will to do it. In the absence of a will, architecture can't serve as a form of expression. Perhaps there are not too many people out there who have a will of their own, or perhaps things such as economy and efficiency are more important than having a will. In any case, I don't encounter many buildings that seem like works of architecture." " The Museum of Literature in Himeji contains overt references both to the land. scaped environment and to the historical setting of the bokeitei and the neighboring Castle. In the case of the Oyamazaki Museum (1994-95), a more modest project, the environment, both built and natural, is again a point of reference. Here, a 1g20s villa built in the Tudor style, in the midst of a garden property in the suburbs of Kyoto, has been restored by the brewer Asahi. Visitors are required to first enter the villa, with its collection of ceramics, before being able to see the structure added by Tadao Ando. A long, narrow concrete rectangle houses a descending staircase, which leads to a cylindrical gallery 6.25 m in diameter. Here, a round exhibition area shows a series of 1914-17 Monet Waterlily-canvases. Within the cylinder, a smaller cubic volume houses sculptures by Moore and Giacometti. At its lower extremity, the rectangle housing the stair- way also leads to the attractive Japanese-style garden. Despite being radically different in its style from the Tudor villa, Ando's annex does not clash with it fundamentally, in part because the exhibition gallery is partially buried. A much more ambitious work, which may point to some of the limitations of Ando, is the Suntory Museum (1992-94) in Osaka, Located on reclaimed land in the southern harbor area of Tempozan, the Suntory Museum is close to Naoshima Contemporary Art Museum

• Tadao Ando in Futagawa, Yukio: Tadao Ando, GA Document Extra oi
ADA Edita, Tokyo 1995. 12 Shelters for the Spirit a large aquarium complex designed by Cambridge Seven Associates (Tempozan Harbor Village, 1990), which attracts five million visitors a year. Its central element is an inverted conic drum 48 m in diameter, containing a 32 m spherical IMAX theater. Not only this form, but the use of stainless steel for the cladding, is an unusual departure for Ando. One other notable exception to his preference for concrete is his use of galvanized iron in the cladding of the Museum of Gojo Culture (Gojo, Nara, 1993-95). Tadao Ando has taken considerable care in the detailing of his concrete to avoid the darkening or soiling which the humid climate of Japan can bring. Not favorable to fluoropolymer coating because it makes the surface of the concrete glossy, he angles normally horizontal surfaces to speed water runoff, for example. Ando's comment on his infrequent use of metal is revealing: "The essential building materials of the 2oth century are glass, concrete and metal. In my architec ture | seek to transpose Japanese ideas into forms which can be built with these materials. I am not against the use of metal. The nature of a project naturally depends on the program laid out by the client, and as it happens I have not often felt that it was indeed opportune to use metal surfaces." 12 Although the Suntory Museum is spectacular and large (total floor area 13,804 m) it has a number of interior spaces that do not display the extreme rigor so typical of Ando's other work. Might it be that he is less comfortable with large projects? The Raika Building, also in Osaka, seems to suffer from some of the same design problems as the Suntory Museum. Vast spaces do not seem to be fully resolved in terms of their use and internal rapport. It was of course undoubtedly the client who requested such an ample structure in the case of the Suntory Museum, and as is often the case in Japan, the means invested in architecture are not necessarily matched by the quality of the exhibition and usage program. The Suntory Museum is exceptional in its relationship to the neighboring water- front. A 1oo m long, 40 m wide plaza slopes down to the harbor. Five concrete pillars set at water's edge are echoed on a breakwater, 70 m offshore. Called Mermaid Plaza, this area also boasts a replica of Copenhagen's famed Little Mermaid, but this fact does not detract from Ando's monumental composition. Linking sea and land, rising up to the museum which in its own right has an upward thrust, unusual in the architect's normally more earthbound forms, this work seems to be evidence of a search for other materials and other design solutions than those perfected in smaller projects. Another of Ando's recent museums where the architectural concept seems at once original and remarkably well adapted to its location is the Nariwa Municipal Museum (1993-94). Located in Okayama Prefecture near Takahashi, the area of Nariwa-cho achieved a certain degree of economic prosperity because of the local copper mines. Traditional houses known as fukiya, which have a distinctive red color, mark the architecture of the this region, and Ando's museum was built on the site of one of these residences. He retained the old stone wall which marks the outline of the 7,194 m? site, situated along a commercial road which is not particularly attractive. The southern side of the site faces a steep mountain, and Tadao Ando has concen- trated both the actual entrance and views toward the exterior on this side, preferring a translucent frosted glaz- ing for the street side. The entrance ramp rises from the street side and turns over a large water basin to pro- vide access at a point that might normally be perceived as the rear facade. The visitor is drawn progressively into the museum itself, passing through a carefully orchestrated sequence of views of nature and of the light falling over Ando's typically remarkable concrete walls. Within, the works exhibited are somewhat heterogen- eous, but the main element is a collection of paintings by the japanese Impressionist artist Torajiro Kojima (1881-1929). Kojima is a figure of interest because he was responsible for purchasing many of the major Impres- Naoshima Contemporary Art

Museum, Annex

12 Interview withTadao Ando, Osaka, October 22, 1996.

13


---

# Page 5

sionist and Post-Impressionist works now in the Ohara Museum in Kurashiki during his stays in Europe following World War I. The history and the land Although of course known for his masterful handling of concrete, Tadao Ando has experimented with wood in two interesting buildings which point toward a funda- mental element of his work: his close attachment to the land and Naoshima Contemporary Art Museum, Annex history of Japan. The first of these was in fact built not in Japan but in Seville on the occasion of Expo 'g2. The Japanese Pavilion (1990-92) had the distinction of being the largest wooden building in the world, with a main facade 60m long, a depth of 40 m and a maximum height of 25 m. Aside from calling essentially on wood, which has long been the preferred building material of Japan, the Pavilion also made use of traditional forms such as the drum- shaped entrance bridge (taikobashi). At the summit of this bridge, visitors naturally came to the entrance, but also discovered a view of the Guadalquivir River from which Columbus sailed toward the New World. Enor- mous glue-laminated wooden columns providing a 17m interior ceiling height were assembled in Japan and shipped to the site. Just as it recalled japanese temple architecture in a form distilled by Ando's design process, so the Pavilion called on such specifically modern features as a translucent Teflon roof. This unusual mixture of tradition and modernity, but also of Japanese and Western cultures and histories, begins to reveal the breadth of Ando's ambition. A number of the ideas developed by Tadao Ando in Seville have found a more definitive form in one of his most inspiring works, the Museum of Wood (1993-94). This museum was built to commemorate the 45th wood festivalin Hyogo Prefecture, which occurs on Arbor Day, a ceremony founded by the Emperor in the 195os following the wartime destruction of the forests. Located three hours by car from Osaka in the mountains of Hyogo Prefecture near a ski resort, the remote, wooded site covers an area of 168,310 m?. Built of wood with a steel frame and reinforced concrete, the museum features a ring-shaped exhibit hall with a 46 m outer diameter and a 22 m void within. The access bridge cuts directly through the structure, bridging over a central fountain, and leading visitors 200 m further on to an observation deck and guest house. Inside the museum, a sloping floor guides visitors down along a spiral path, which takes them twice into the central void. Locally milled Hyogo cedar was used for the posts and beams. The enormous laminated wood columns, rising to a height of 16m, are arranged in a manner that is reminiscent of the forest, and also recalls the Seville building. Although not related to the design of any particular temple, this structure does give a feel- ing of communion with nature. Because of its location, its theme and its design, the Museum of Wood high- lights the ties of Tadao Ando to the land and to the history of Japan, without any trace of the type of superficial historicism which was typical of the post-modern period in architecture. More clearly stated, he is pointing the way to a kind of modern architecture which is conscious not only of the distant past, but also of more recent achievements such as those of Le Corbusier or Louis Kahn. When asked what the influence on him today of the work of Louis Kahn is, Ando replies, "A work of Louis Kahn's which I particularly admire is the Indian Institute of Management in Ahmedabad (1962-6g, with Balkrishna Doshi). Employing an apparently rigid and cold geo- metric scheme, he used local building materials and succeeded in creating a play of light and shadow in a struc ture which is admirable in its respect for local culture and conditions. Above and beyond its functional aspects, 14 Shelters for the Spirit Kahn designed an architectural space here which is spiritual." 13 Also evident in the Museum of Wood, as in many other Ando buildings, is a profound sense of the spirituality which the built form can attain. The presence of the buildings of Tadao Ando owes something to the very thick- ness of their concrete walls. In the case of the Church of the Light, the shell of the building is no less than 380 mm thick, whereas the Church on the Water in Hokkaido (1988) has a triple skin with a 250 mm outer layer of concrete, 50 mm of insulation and a 600 mm inner wall of concrete. As Philip Drew writes, "Ando conceived his buildings almost as land art, buried places that struggle to emerge from the earth, which by their struggle dramatize the encounter between architecture and nature." 4 Although this tendency to view buildings as a form of land art is even more strongly expressed in projects such as the Naoshima Museum of Contemporary Art, Ando's Chikatsu-Asuka Historical Museum (1991-94) provides strong evidence of his attachment not only to the land, but also to the ancient history of Japan. Situated near the town of Kishi in the Prefecture of Osaka, this unusual structure is built amidst some of the best-known burial mounds (kofun) in Japan, including four

imperial tombs.

Although foreigners generally trace the origins of Japanese civilization to China or Korea, they may not be aware of very ancient cultures such as the Neolithic Jomon, named for its character- istic cord pattern earthenware, some of which dates back more than 10,000 years, making it the oldest known pottery in the world. It was in the third century A.D. that the so-called Yayoi people began to erect large mounds over the tombs of their leaders in the region of Kinki, near the modern cities of Kyoto and Osaka. The largest of these is that of the Emperor Nintoku, who is said to have ruled between 313 and 399. Laid out in a characteristic keyhole pattern, this funerary site, one of the largest of the ancient world, is almost 500 m long, covering an area of 32 ha, and reaching a height of 35 m. Because the Imperial Household Ministry rules out any archeolo- gical digs on this site, the tomb of Nintoku retains a mystery proportionate to its great size. 15 The Chikatsu-Asuka Historical Museum appears in a lush green natural setting around a bend in the road leading from the small town of Kishi. Ando's own description of the building gives a clear idea of its appearance. "To produce a museum integrated with the burial mounds, it was conceived as a stepped hill lifted tectonically from the natural terrain, from where the visitor could view the entire burial mound group. Nearby, plum trees, a pond and paths among the surround hills envelop the museum in an environment conducive to outdoor activity and allow it to function as a regional hub. Its roof, which is really a large stepped plaza, will be used for drama and music festivals as well as lectures and other performances, Inside the building, the display areas are dark and the objects are exhibited as they were found in the tombs. Visitors experience the sensation of entering an actual tomb and feel drawn, in mood, back to ancient

times." 16

A main feature of the museum is the concrete tower, whose windowless presence dominates the stepped structure. Once the visitor has entered the museum, he looks up into the void inside the tower, expecting to find a source of light. Rather, he stares into black space. When asked how he came to the idea of this central tower, with its undeniably sculptural presence, especially when viewed from the outside, Ando says emphatically, "My first thought in the case of the tower of the Chikatsu Asuka Museum was to create the interior feeling of a tomb. The exterior form evolved from that desire. I wanted the interior space of the museum to be even darker than it is, but for security reasons, it was necessary to maintain a certain level of

light." 17

Koshino House

13 Ibid.

14 Drew, Philip: Church on the Water, Church of the Light. Phaidon,

London 1996.

15 Reischauer, Edwin O, and Craig, Albert M. Japan, Tradition and Transformation. George Allen & Unwin. Sydney 1979. 16 Tadao Ando in Dal Co, Francesco: Tadao Ando, Complete Works. Prandon. London 1Gok 17 Interview with Tadao Ando, Osaka, October 22, 1996.


---

# Page 6

In Ando's affirmation that he wished to make the Chikatsu-Asuka Museum's interior even darker there is a reminiscence of his comments on the Church of the Light, which he might well have built without the glass in the cruciform opening. There is in this gesture a rigor or rather an intention to push an idea to its limits that is characteristic of the work of Ando. In this museum dedicated to the tomb culture of Japan it was logical to relate the design to that of its historic environment, but again, Tadao Ando's distillation of the concept led him to create a thoroughly modern building, which is also deeply rooted in the very earth of Japan. These connections are emphasized in the main structure, but also in the immediate environment, which has also been thought out by the architect. A waterfall runs close to the entrance of the Museum, which is reached by walking along a curved path, delineated by a concrete wall. The use of water, here. as in many other projects such as those in Himeji, does have a particular significance for the architect. As he says, "For the Japanese, water is not only felt in terms of its physical presence but in spiritual terms. There is an expression for example that has it that we can forget the past by throwing it into the water. The use of water in my architecture is therefore an attempt to bring to bear a spiritual dimension which is directly related to Japan- ese thought and tradition." 18 The visitor can enter the museum, or choose to walk through its immediate environment, where there are various points of view on the structure itself and on the nearby burial sites. A con- crete folly in the garden frames a perfect view of the museum itself, blending nature, history and the earth itself into a coherent, modern whole. Islands of the mind The Naoshima Museum and Hotel (1990-92 and 1994-95) is located on an elev- ated cape at the southern end of the relatively unspoiled island of Naoshima, in the Inland Sea of Japan. This island is reached by ferry from neighboring industrial ports such as Takamatsu and Uno. The complex itself can be entered either by road or from an arrival pier and stepped plaza. In Phase I, Tadao Ando designed a large exhibition space for art and a small hotel, with a total floor area of 3,643 m?. In this instance, Ando combined the use of stone rubble walls and concrete. Because it is part of a national park site, and because new construc- tion is severely regulated in Japan's remaining wild areas, environmental requirements dictated that more than half of the volume be underground. The main exhibition hall, sunken below grade, is two levels high, 50 m long and 8m wide, and is used to show contemporary art, with works by artists such as Frank Stella. From its restaurant terrace and other locations the Naoshima Museum offers spectacular views on the Inland Sea with its volcanic islands and remarkably heavy maritime traffic. Phase Il, used mainly as hotel space, includes 551 m of floor area. Since regulations would have required this building to have a pitched roof, Ando placed the struc ture underground. It is a one-level building with an oval plan, and an oval courtyard covered with water. By dig- ging into the site, Tadao Ando has created something akin to an earthwork. As he says, "There is a plan to have me design one building a year all over this area. Every time you go, there will be something under construction. This will be kept up for ten, twenty years. This project in its conception is very much like contemporary art." When asked if he indeed views his architecture as a form of land art, Ando replies, "That naturally depends on each project. It should be remembered that most of the great examples of traditional Japanese architecture were designed with reference to their gardens. Those monuments are in a sense a version of land art before the time of land art." ig This indirect response does not fully explain Tadao Ando's attitude, but it does once again point to his reverence for Japanese tradition, combined with a great interest in the masterpieces of modern architecture. When asked if there is a difference between a work of art and architecture, or if a building can be a

18 Ibid.

19 Ibid.

16 Shelters for the Spirit work of art, he says, "I try to make my works as beautiful as possible. I should say, however, when I look at buildings like Le Corbusier's Villa Savoye or certain works of Louis Kahn that I feel that those are indeed works of art." 2o Ando may not wish to directly compare architecture and art, but other comments which he has made, such as those of his acceptance speech for the 1995 Pritzker Prize, shed further light on this central question: "Architecture is deemed complete only upon the intervention of the human that experiences it. In other words, architectural space becomes alive only in correspondence with the human presence that perceives it. In our contemporary culture, where all of us are subjected to intense exterior stimulation, especially by the electronic environment, the role of architectural space as a spiritual shelter is crucial. Here again, what is of primary importance are the imagination and fictionality that architecture contains beyond the substantive. Without stepping into the ambiguous realm of the human spirit - happiness, affection, tranquillity, tension - architec- ture cannot achieve its fictionality. This is truly architecture's proper realm, but is also one that is impossible to formulate. Only after speculating the worlds of both the actual and the fictional together can architecture come into existence as an expression, and rise into the realm of art." 21 When describing the step-by-step process involved in the expansion of the Naoshima Museum of Contemporary Art, Ando likens it to an earthworkor to a form of contemporary art. It is also, like his other successful works, very much a spiritual shelter. Emphasized by its protective stone and concrete walls, this protective function is first evident in the physical realm, but Ando develops it beyond the question of the body to encompass the mind. His shelters for the spirit are in no way dependent on a specific religious belief, rather they convey a sense of mystery and progression toward a point of understanding, as seen most clearly in the Hompuku-ji Temple for example. Hompuku-ji is located on the island of Awaji. Coincidence had it that at 5:46 a.m. local time on January 17, 1995, an earthquake measuring 7.2 on the Richter scale had as its epicenter a point 14 km below the surface of northern Awaji (N 3436° E 135.03°). This cataclysmic event, which lasted a mere 20 sec, but left 5,480 dead, 236,000 homeless and more than 67,000 homes completely destroyed, principally in the nearby port city of Kobe. 22 It is a measure of the depth of Ando's own feeling about these events that he contributed the $100,o00 awarded to him by the Hyatt Foundation for the Pritzker Prize to a foundation for orphans of the great Hanshin earthquake. Thanks to their inherent solidity, and to their precise locations, neither Hompuku-ji nor Ando's buildings in Kobe such as the Rokko Housing were damaged by these events. Although there were historical records of earthquakes in the region (an event of magnitude 7 or greater in 1596 and a magnitude 6.1 earthquake in 1916 at almost exactly the same epicenter), it had been widely assumed that Kobe was less at risk than Tokyo or other parts of Japan. This fact, coupled with the authorities' apparent difficulty to come to grips with the earthquake, upset the confidence of many Japanese in their very way of life. If Tadao Ando's buildings in or near Kobe survived, it is due to the fact that they are designed with earthquakes in mind. Japanese building codes now impose precautions on architects, but Ando's thick walls are also the product of a land where the stability of the earth itself can be called into question. 23 It is in the north-eastern part of Awaji that Tadao Ando has recently undertaken his most ambitious project (Awajishima Project, Awajishima, Hyogo, under construction). On a site measuring more than 600 m in length and a total area of about 100 ha, Tadao Ando has become involved in the creation of a government-administrated park that will include a botanical garden, a place for the study of horticulture, an open air theater, a convention hall, a hotel and a guest house. This site is in itself unusual because it was stripped

Time's 1&1l

20 lbid.

21 Tadao Ando in: The Pritzker Architecture Prize, 1995 The Hyatt Foundation, Jenson & Walker, Los Angeles 1995. 22 Information from Kobe's "Hanshin Earthquake Outline Report," on Internet: http://www.kobe-cuts.ac.jp/kobe

city/cityoffice/06/om/report/index.html

23 There are approximately 1,500 seismic events (mostly tremors) recorded in japan every year.

17


---

# Page 7

of its earth and sand as part of the enormous effort to build the artificial island on which the Kansai Airport is located in the Bay of Osaka. As Ando says, "Our first idea was to restore the greenery, and more specifically to hold a flower exposition there and to develop the area into a permanent garden. We called this the Millennium Garden, and the project was developed on the basis of that concept. It was decided that the facilities would be linked by living things, that is, plants such as trees and flowers, and the flow of water and people. The Alhambra in Granada provides a historical model. There, water links small patios. We decided to make use of such con- cepts in this site." 24 It would seem that, with the reputation which has come to him as a result of international prizes, that Ando is being given the possibility to branch out more and more into his conception of an architec- tural environment which includes its natural setting. "The basic framework for this project," says Ando, "is round universes and square universes." As Shuji Takashina, Director of the National Museum of Modern Art in Tokyo, has pointed out, Tadao Ando's approach is closely related to his concept both of geometry and of nature. In a lecture delivered at Yale University in 1987, entitled How to Deal with the Hopelessly Stagnant State of (Contemporary) Modern Architecture' Ando, says Takashina, "clearly set forth his architectural philosophy: Architecture brings new energy and life through constant dialogue and collision with contextual elements. I employ geometric form to give order to the whole, because geometry, I believe, is architectural reason ... More- over, in my architecture, 1 seek to create situations where man and nature can commune. I want to realize spaces within my buildings which promote conversations with natural materials, where one can feel light, air, and rain." 25 Tadao Ando does his best to minimize the impact of the awards which he has received. He says, "Prizes are not really that important to me especially vis-à-vis what I have built. I am naturally honored to receive them, but I do make a conscious effort to keep my mind on my work. It may be that prizes have brought me more prestigious clients, but curiously those prestigious clients sometimes are very demand- ing, and in a sense, I must work all the harder to achieve my own goals. It is extremely important to me that remain free in my own mind." 26 Defining his own set of rules, which might seem to be as rigorous as the unity of time and place imposed on classical theater, Tadao Ando has set out to explore the past and the future of architecture. He has created links between East and West, between modernity and ancient tradition, between nature and the built environment, and between the physical reality of a material as solid as concrete and the more ethereal realm of the spirit. Although he is profoundly Japanese, he has, thanks in good part to his wife Yumiko, who speaks fluent English, reached out to many other parts of the world. He may face the arrogance of some Western critics who see in his work little more than an elaboration on Le Corbusier's precepts, but this negation of his talent does not stand up to the reality of his buildings, nor probably to historic fact. No architect other than Tadao Ando has received the four most prestigious international awards for his profes- sion and the juries of these prizes have acknowledged a fact that his built work makes clear: Tadao Ando is the world's greatest living architect. If he has one weakness it may be a difficulty in translating the grandeur of his smaller buildings to a larger scale. Born in 1941, he has the time, the energy and the talent to face that challenge as well. Naoshima Contemporary Art Museum 24 Tadao Ando in: Futagawa, Yukio: Tadao Ando. GA Document Extra oi, ADA Edita, Tokyo 1995 25 Shuji Takashina quoting from Tadao Ando, The Yale Studio and Current Works (New York: Rizzoli International Publications, 398g). @20 text conies rom nternet

http://ifrm.glocom.ac.jp:8o/japanecho/1993/20-1/20-1takashina.html

26 Interview with Tadao Ando, Osaka, October 22, 1996. 18 Shelters for the Spirit Zufluchtsorte für die Seele Der erste Eindruck von Tadao Andos Architektur ist ein Gefühl der Körperlichkeit. Seine kraftvollen Betonmauern ziehen eine Grenze. Über diesen Punkt hinaus gibt es keinen Durchgang außer dem, den er durch seinen Willen öffnet. Der zweite Eindruck, den Tadao Andos Architektur vermittelt, ist ein Gefühl der Greifbarkeit. Harte Mauern fühlen sich unter den Fingern weich an. Sie schließen aus oder ein, lassen Licht, den Wind oder den zufalligen Besucher ein, der das Chaos des alltäglichen Lebens hinter sich laßt, um in einem Reich der Stille Zuflucht zu suchen. Der dritte Eindruck von Tadao Andos Architektur ist ein Gefühl der Leere. Im Gebäudeinneren umgeben nur Licht und Raum den Besucher. Enso, die geheimnisvollen Kreise, die von Zen-Mönchen in einer einzigen Linie gezogen werden, symbolisieren Leere, Einheit und den Augenblick der Erleuchtung. Der Kreis und andere streng geometrische Formen gehören zu Andos Formensprache, die der westlichen Architektur ebenso viel verdankt wie fernöstlichem Gedankengut. Einfluß auf seine Arbeiten habe das Pantheon in Rom genommen, meint Ando - ein Beweis dafür, daß einfache Formen, die mit Hilfe einer meisterhaften Beherrschung von Licht und Materialien gestaltet wurden, einen transzendenten Raum schaffen können. Daneben spricht Ando von den Carceri Piranesis, deren »dynamische Vertikalität« im Gegensatz zu der stark horizontalen Ausrichtung der traditionellen japanischen Architektur steht, die von Natur aus »nicht-geometrisch und unregelmaßig« ist. Tadao Ando sieht ein Ziel seiner Arbeiten darin, diese auf den ersten Blick divergierenden Auffassungen von Raum in einer »einheitlichen transzendenten Architektur« zu vereinen. Als Gewinner des Carlsberg Preises 1992, des Pritzker Preises 1995, des Praemium Imperiale 1996 und der Goldmedaille des Royal Institute of British Architects 1997 ist Tadao Ando heute einer der angesehensten Architekten der Welt, der eine ganze Generation von Studenten beeinflußt hat. Seltsamer- weise wurde Ando jedoch hauptsächlich aufgrund seiner professionellen Publikationen bekannt, und nur wenige seiner Bewunderer - oder seiner Kritiker - haben die Zeit und Mühe investiert, seine Bauten zu besu- chen. Aber selbst das beste Foto und die genaueste Zeichnung können nicht die Wirkung des wechselnden Lichts wiedergeben, die der Sonnenuntergang zum Beispiel hinter dem Hompuku-ji-Tempel auf der Insel Awaji erzeugt, von wo aus sich ein weiter Blick über die Bucht von Osaka bietet. Eigene Häuser, eigene Welten Der 1941 in Osaka geborene Tadao Ando ist Autodidakt - eine Seltenheit unter den heutigen Architekten - und erwarb sein Wissen hauptsächlich auf Reisen durch die Vereinigten Staaten, Europa und Afrika (1962-69). 1969 gründete er in Osaka das Büro Tadao Ando Architect & Associates. Auf die Frage, wie er zur Architektur kam, antwortet Ando: »Als ich 15 war, wurden in der Nähe unseres Hauses Bauarbeiten durchgeführt, und ich lernte einige der Zimmerleute kennen. Etwa zur gleichen Zeit entdeckte ich in einem Antiquariat ein Werkverzeichnis von Le Corbusier. Ich zeichnete einige seiner Entwürfe ab, und dies könnte man als Beginn meiner Beschäftigung mit Architektur bezeichnen.«1. Obwohl häufig behauptet wird, daß Ando stark von Le Corbusier und anderen Persönlichkeiten wie Louis Kahn beeinflußt worden sei, zeigt bereits sein erstes Projekt, das ihm größere Auf- merksamkeit einbrachte - das sogenannte Haus Azuma (Reihenhaus, Sumiyoshi, Osaka, 1975-76) - viele eigenständige Züge. Auf einem kleinen Baugelände (57,3 m2) in eine Reihe von schmalen Häusern integriert, fallen die einfache Betonfassade und der ebenso schmucklose Eingang des Hauses sofort ins Auge, ohne den Rhythmus der Straße zu stören. Die Holzhäuser, die einst diese Straße säumten, wurden durch eine bunte 1 Interview, mit Tadao Ando, Osaka, 15. Dezember 1990.


---

