

### **Shelters for the Spirit**

The first impression of Tadao Ando's architecture is its materiality. His powerful concrete walls set a limit. Beyond this point there is no passage but that which is opened by his will. A second impression of Tadao Ando's architecture is its tactility. Hard walls seem soft to the touch. They exclude then enclose, admitting light, wind and the passing visitor, who leaves behind the disorder of everyday existence to be sheltered in a realm of stillness. A third impression of Tadao Ando's architecture is its emptiness. Within, only light and space surround the visitor.

Enso, the mysterious circles drawn by Zen Buddhist monks in a single stroke, symbolize emptiness, oneness, and the moment of enlightenment. The circle and other rigorous geometric forms are the vocabulary of Ando, related as much to Western architecture as to any Eastern thought. He cites the Pantheon in Rome as an influence on his work, proof that simple shapes, fashioned with a mastery of light and materials, can create a transcendent space. He speaks also of the Prisons of Piranese, whose "dynamic verticality" contrasts with the horizontal emphasis of traditional Japanese architecture, which is "non-geometric and irregular" by nature. Tadao Ando has said that a goal of his work is to bring together these apparently divergent ideas of space in a "unified transcendent architecture."

Winner of the 1992 Carlsberg Prize, the 1995 Pritzker Prize, the 1996 Praemium Imperiale and the 1997 Royal Institute of British Architects Gold Medal, Tadao Ando is today one of the most highly respected architects in the world, influencing an entire generation of students. Curiously though, Ando is known mostly through professional publications. Few of his admirers, or for that matter his detractors, have taken the time and effort required to visit his buildings. Even the best photography or the most complete drawing cannot reproduce the effects of changing light as the sun goes down behind Hompuku-ji Temple on the island of Awaji, overlooking the Bay of Osaka.

---

### **Private houses, private worlds**

Born in Osaka in 1941, Tadao Ando is unusual in that he was self-educated as an architect, largely through travels in the United States, Europe and Africa (1962-69). He founded Tadao Ando Architect & Associates in Osaka in 1969. When asked how he came to be interested in architecture, he replies, "As it happens work was carried on where I lived when I was 15, and I got to know some of the carpenters. About the same time, in a used book store I saw a book on the complete work of Le Corbusier. I recopied some of his drawings, and I would say that that is how I began to be interested in architecture."

Although the influence of Le Corbusier and others such as Louis Kahn on Ando is often cited, it is interesting to note that the first project which brought him public attention, the so-called Azuma House (Row House, Sumiyoshi, Osaka, 1975-76) is already very much a personal creation. On a small site (57.3 m²) inserted into a row of narrow houses, the simple concrete façade and equally unadorned doorway stand out without breaking the rhythm of the street. Old wood houses which formerly lined the street have given way to a hodgepodge of generally undistinguished modern residences. Although this residential area of Osaka is somewhat less chaotic in appearance than many other parts of a metropolis with a population density of 11,793 persons per square kilometer (1995), there is a marked contrast between this concrete slab and its environment. Stepping through the door, the visitor needs no longer be conscious of the external world. The house is divided into three equal sections - a living room and kitchen below, and two bedrooms above, separated by an external courtyard, and the stairway up to the second floor. Access to the bathroom on the ground floor from the bedrooms requires the resident to go into the courtyard. This fact surprises Western visitors but seems to be of little concern to the Japanese, who as Ando says "are used to living with the rhythms of nature." As for its limited dimensions, with total floor space of 64.7 m², the Sumiyoshi Row House exceeds the average size of an Osaka dwelling (estimated at 61.0 m² in 1993). Despite a rigorously geometric design, this house, with its unusual façade and open central courtyard, is closely related both to local architecture and to Japanese traditions. By excluding the chaotic environment and admitting nature, Ando also developed what would become one of the central themes of his work in this house, which won a prize from the Japanese Architectural Association.

---

### **Homes for the Spirit**

When asked if he is religious, Tadao Ando replies, "I feel that the goal of most religions is similar, to make men happier and more at ease with themselves. I see no contradiction in my designing Christian churches." Indeed, Ando has built a number of Christian chapels and other places of religion and contemplation. In his architecture in general, there is a processional quality, which is related to the design of Japanese temples. "I do not make direct visual reference to temples in my work," says Ando, "but it is true that I have visited a very large number of such buildings, and unconsciously the idea of an indirect access recurs frequently in my work. Traditional Japanese architecture is almost never symmetrical, and this too enters into my subconscious undoubtedly."

One of Tadao Ando's most remarkable buildings is also one of his simplest. The Church of the Light (Ibaraki, Osaka, 1988-89) is located in a residential suburb 40 km to the north-east of the center of Osaka. It consists of a rectangular concrete box crossed at a 15° angle by a freestanding wall. The bisecting wall obliges the visitor to turn to enter the chapel. As ever with Ando, entering a building requires an act of will and an awareness of the architecture. Within, the rough-textured floors and pews are made from dark-stained scaffolding planks emphasizing the starkness of the design. In an unusual configuration, the floor descends in stages toward the altar, which is next to the rear wall, whose horizontal and vertical openings form a cross, flooding the space with light. Built for the Ibaraki Kasugaoka Church, a member of the United Church of Christ in Japan, at the behest of the Reverend Noboru Karukome, the church has a total floor area of only 115 m², but an undeniable strength. For the Reverend Karukome, this place brings to mind the words of Christ, "For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them" (IM, 18,20). The church discovered in the course of construction that it could not afford a roof. Ando told the building company that he would consider the church to be finished as it was, open to the sky, leading the company to donate the needed covering. So too, he proposed that there be no glass in the cruciform opening, allowing wind to blow through the chapel just as light entered. Rejected because of winter cold, this idea too is symbolic of Ando's consistent emphasis on closing out the urban environment, while admitting manifestations of nature.

---

### **Museums: art, literature and more**

The Children's Museum (1988-89) is located on a large wooded hillside site (87,222 m²) overlooking a lake near the city of Himeji. In this mature work of Tadao Ando, the visitor is invited to discover the architecture in relation to its natural setting. The main unit of the museum contains a library, indoor and outdoor theaters, an exhibition gallery, a multipurpose hall and a restaurant. The outdoor theater is located on the rooftop, with a spectacular view of the lake. A stepped waterfall and pool near the building also serve to make a connection between the museum and the scenery of the lake. A path, marked by a long concrete wall leads the visitor away from the main structure toward a workshop complex consisting of a two-story square building. Along this path Ando has placed a surprising group of 16 concrete columns in a square grid. In their wooded setting, these 9 m high pillars recall that the first columns in architectural history were inspired by trees. Somewhere between architecture and sculpture, since it is dictated by no specific function, this intervention marks his intention to go beyond the traditional concept of his art to reaffirm a link between nature and the built form.

---

### **The history and the land**

Although of course known for his masterful handling of concrete, Tadao Ando has experimented with wood in two interesting buildings which point toward a fundamental element of his work: his close attachment to the land and history of Japan. The first of these was in fact built not in Japan but in Seville on the occasion of Expo '92. The Japanese Pavilion (1990-92) had the distinction of being the largest wooden building in the world, with a main facade 60 m long, a depth of 40 m and a maximum height of 25 m. Aside from calling essentially on wood, which has long been the preferred building material of Japan, the Pavilion also made use of traditional forms such as the drum-shaped entrance bridge (taikobashi). At the summit of this bridge, visitors naturally came to the entrance, but also discovered a view of the Guadalquivir River from which Columbus sailed toward the New World. Enormous glue-laminated wooden columns providing a 17 m interior ceiling height were assembled in Japan and shipped to the site. Just as it recalled Japanese temple architecture in a form distilled by Ando's design process, so the Pavilion called on such specifically modern features as a translucent Teflon roof. This unusual mixture of tradition and modernity, but also of Japanese and Western cultures and histories, begins to reveal the breadth of Ando's ambition.

---

### **Islands of the mind**

The Naoshima Museum and Hotel (1990-92 and 1994-95) is located on an elevated cape at the southern end of the relatively unspoiled island of Naoshima, in the Inland Sea of Japan. This island is reached by ferry from neighboring industrial ports such as Takamatsu and Uno. The complex itself can be entered either by road or from an arrival pier and stepped plaza. In Phase I, Tadao Ando designed a large exhibition space for art and a small hotel, with a total floor area of 3,643 m². In this instance, Ando combined the use of stone rubble walls and concrete. Because it is part of a national park site, and because new construction is severely regulated in Japan's remaining wild areas, environmental requirements dictated that more than half of the volume be underground. The main exhibition hall, sunken below grade, is two levels high, 50 m long and 8 m wide, and is used to show contemporary art, with works by artists such as Frank Stella. From its restaurant terrace and other locations the Naoshima Museum offers spectacular views on the Inland Sea with its volcanic islands and remarkably heavy maritime traffic. Phase II, used mainly as hotel space, includes 551 m² of floor area. Since regulations would have required this building to have a pitched roof, Ando placed the structure underground. It is a one-level building with an oval plan, and an oval courtyard covered with water. By digging into the site, Tadao Ando has created something akin to an earthwork.

